= Chapter 4 -- Network Layer =

Difference application and transport vs network layer:
    * application layer and transport layer in end systems.
    * network layer in routers.
    * Every intermediate device must also participate in network layer.

Network Layer creates the path that should be taken for communication between
end devices. Also check out the [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_layer|wikipedia]] page.

Network Layer deals with the _routing_ of the communication.

Reaching a router is analogous to reaching an intersection. 

Routing is called global.

== Two key network layer functions ==

Forwarding:: move packets from a router's input link to appropriate router output link.

Routing:: determine route taken by packets from source to destination (Routing happens from source to destination).

First forwarding happens, then routing.

== Two planes of network layer ==

=== Data plane ===

* It is _local_, per-router function.
* determines how datagram arriving on router input port is forwarded to router output port.

=== Control plane ===

* It is _network-wide logic_.
* determines how datagram is routed _among routers_ along end-to-end path from source to destination
* There are two control plane approaches:
    1. Traditional routing algorithms (implemented in routers).
    2. Software-defined networking: implemented in remote servers.


== Forwarding ==

Two methods:
1. destination-based forwarding: forward based on destination IP address (traditional)
2. generalized forwarding: forward based on any set of header field values.

=== Destination based forwarding ===

Forwarding table
| Destination Address Range              | Link Interface |
|----------------------------------------|:--------------:|
| 11001000 00010111 000 _10000 00000000_ |       0        |
| 11001000 00010111 000 _10111 11111111_ |       \/       |
| 11001000 00010111 000 _11000 00000000_ |       1        |
| 11001000 00010111 000 _11000 11111111_ |       \/       |
| 11001000 00010111 000 _11001 00000000_ |       2        |
| 11001000 00010111 000 _11111 11111111_ |       \/       |
| otherwise                              |       3        |


